.TH RNASUBOPT l
.ER
.SH NAME
RNAsubopt \- calculate suboptimal secondary structures of RNAs
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBRNAsubopt [\-e\ \fIrange\fP] [\-s] [\-lodos] [\-T\ \fItemp\fP] [\-d] [\-4] [\-noGU] [\-noCloseGU] [\-P\ paramfile] [\-nsp\ pairs]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I subopt
reads RNA sequences from stdin and calculates all suboptimal secondary
structures within a user defined energy range above the minimum free
energy (mfe). It prints the suboptimal structures in bracket notation
followed by the energy in kcal/mol to stdout.
The number of structures returned typically grows exponentially with both 
sequence length and energy range.
.SH OPTIONS
.B \-e\ \fIrange\fP
Calculate suboptimal structures within \fIrange\fP kcal/mol of the mfe. 
Default is 1.
.TP
.B \-s
Sort the structures by energy. Uses more memory and CPU
time. Alternatively, pipe the output through `sort +1n'.
.TP
.B \-lodos 
Calculate the Lower Density of States. Output lines consist of an energy
followed by the number of structures with that energy, suitable for
plotting the density of states. Does not print the structures themseleves.
.TP
.B \-d
do not assign dangling end energies to bases adjacent to helices in
multi-loops and free ends. By default RNAsubopt treats dangling ends in the
same way as partion function folding, or mfe folding with RNAfold -d2.
.PP
The \fB\-T\fP, \fB\-4\fP, \fB\-noGU\fP, \fB\-noCloseGU\fP, \fB\-noLP\fP
\fB\-P\fP, \fB\-nsp\fP, options work as in RNAfold.
.TP
.SH AUTHORS
Stefan Wuchty, Ivo L Hofacker, Walter Fontana.
